Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we are
going to be talking about Artificial
Intelligence and the environment.
It has been billed as a disaster in
plain sight, technology pointlessly
destroying the planet, but is there
actually any substance behind it?
Why are some environmental activists
highly critical of things like ChatGPT?
Are they right to be critical, and
what does this all mean for you?
OK then, let's not waste a
minute and get right into it.
There was a report from BBC Scotland a few
weeks ago with the title “Scottish data
centres powering AI already using enough
water to fill 27 million bottles a year”.
The headline was deliberately provocative.
27 million bottles sounds like…a lot.
And if AI is responsible for using all
of this, does this mean 27 fewer bottles
of water for the good people of Scotland?
For the story, the reporter had taken
to the streets to ask people whether
they used tools like ChatGPT, and
whether they knew “it could be bad
for the environment”, using that
exact phrasing of the sentence.
A loaded question, as we say in English.
Of course, most said they were
not, and agreed that people
should be more aware of it.
And the general reaction is probably
best summed up by the end of the
clip, where an elderly gentleman
commented, “one day you’re waking up
and you cannae have a shower because
there’s no water because it’s cooling
down some computer somewhere”.
So, is this actually true?
Are the good people of Scotland in
danger of having to go without a
shower because the water has all been
used for your and my ChatGPT queries?
In a word, no, especially not in Scotland.
As one user on Facebook humorously
put it, “I live in Scotland.
I often think “if only we had more
water, I mean if just for once it
could fall out of the sky or something.
I’m burning up here””.
To be fair, if you clicked into the BBC
article and didn’t just watch the video,
the article did admit that water use for
data centres had increased significantly,
but was still only responsible for
0.005% of the water supply in Scotland.
And anyone who lives in Scotland or who
has visited Scotland will probably be
able to tell you, without reaching for
any official dataset or doing complicated
calculations on Excel, that Scotland
has many problems, but water does not
seem to be one of them; if Scotland
were an independent country, it would
be the second wettest country in Europe.
So, as far as Scotland is concerned,
they could build 100 times as many data
centres, and it would still only use 0.5%
of the Scottish water supply, and that’s
assuming there are no improvements in
efficiency in how this water is used.
Now, before we get into some of the
details of the other environmental
concerns around AI, it’s first worth
spending a few minutes clarifying
exactly what we’re talking about,
how AI uses energy, and why this is
different from previous technologies.
For starters, using any kind
of technology uses energy.
When you send an email, search for
something on Google, listen to this
podcast, or do almost anything that
connects to the Internet, information
is being transferred between
your computer and somewhere else.
That “somewhere else” isn’t a mysterious
cloud floating above your head.
In most cases, it's a physical
location called a data centre.
A data centre is, essentially, a
giant warehouse full of computers,
tens of thousands of them, all
stacked up in metal racks, blinking
away, processing and storing data.
They don’t look very exciting,
but they are the backbone
of the modern digital world.
Every photo you upload, every YouTube
video you watch, every Spotify
song you play, this is all being
sent to and from one of these data
centres somewhere in the world.
And all of this takes energy.
Your computer or mobile phone
needs energy to make the request,
so you charge it up at home.
And the computers in the data
centre, of course, also need
energy; they need electricity.
But, like any computer, they can also
get very hot, which means they need
to be cooled; sometimes this is by
enormous air-conditioning systems,
or in some cases, by water that
flows through pipes to remove heat.
So, whether it’s these air-conditioning
systems or cold water, these data centres
require large amounts of electricity
to keep everything running, and more
importantly, to keep everything cool.
So, even before we get to the question
of AI, every time you open a web
page, watch a YouTube video, and yes,
even listen to a podcast, a little
bit of energy is being used somewhere
in the world to make that happen.
Now, with Artificial Intelligence,
things are a bit different.
When you ask ChatGPT a question, or
generate an image, or use an AI assistant
on your phone, it isn’t just retrieving
some information from somewhere.
It's computing it, creating
something new in real time.
This means much more powerful
computers are involved, the kind
that can do billions or even
trillions of calculations per second.
These chips, or Graphics Processing
Units, GPUs for short, they use
far more energy than the servers
that store your emails or photos.
And because AI systems are so large,
with billions of parameters or virtual
“connections” between artificial
neurons, they need vast amounts of energy
both to train them and to run them.
So while a Google search might use
enough energy to power a light bulb
for a few seconds, generating a single
AI image or a long ChatGPT reply,
early critics pointed out, might use
ten, twenty, or even fifty times more.
That is why environmental campaigners
have started to pay attention, because
AI use is exploding at breakneck speed,
and AI is much more energy-intensive
than almost every other consumer
technology; each request requires far more
computing power, therefore more energy.
But, you are probably wondering,
how much energy is this?
Well, when ChatGPT was first
released, there were all sorts of
articles suggesting that it was 22
times more energy-intensive than
using Google and that it was a
giant menace to the environment.
22 times more emissions sounds bad,
but firstly, that number has proved
not to be correct, and secondly, it’s
important to see it in perspective.
On the first point, according to
a recent study, a single Google
Gemini text query, so a single use
of Google’s AI, uses 0.24 Wh of
electricity, emits 0.03 grams of CO2,
and consumes 0.26 millilitres of water.
Now, to put that in perspective,
the energy use is like one
second of using a microwave, or 6
seconds of having your fridge on.
0.03 grams of CO2 is practically
nothing, and 0.26 millilitres
is five drops of water.
Now, some AI uses are more intensive,
like generating an image or video,
and not all AI models are the same;
OpenAI, which is the company behind
ChatGPT, hasn’t released a similar
study, and it’s believed it’s not
yet as energy efficient as Google.
I’ll use them semi-interchangeably here.
If ChatGPT isn’t yet as efficient as
Google Gemini, it will most likely get
there shortly, and both will continue to
become more, not less, energy-efficient.
So, you’ll excuse me if
I flit between the terms.
Now, in the interests of balance, there
have been some criticisms of this Google
study, with commentators pointing out
that it doesn’t take into account factors
like the training of the AI model or the
carbon cost of the AI chips themselves.
But even taking these into account,
the effect is still negligible.
To put it in perspective again,
taking everything into account, a
single AI query, based on recent
estimates, is like uploading 9 photos
to social media, leaving a digital
alarm clock on for 50 minutes, or
streaming Netflix for 30 seconds.
These are things most of us don’t
think twice about, yet it is AI
that has come under the spotlight.
The news is full of articles with
headlines like “training an AI model is
like 550 return flights from New York to
San Francisco”, or that “ChatGPT emits as
much CO2 as 20,000 American households”.
Or, of course, even by the BBC,
which should know better, “AI uses 27
million bottles of water in Scotland”.
Yes, the total energy impact of
AI has grown incredibly quickly,
but it started from zero.
ChatGPT went from zero to 100
million users in under a year.
By July 2025, it had 700 million users,
10% of the world’s adult population,
sending 18 billion messages every week.
Now, those numbers will be higher, and it
looks like they will continue to trend up.
Using a tiny amount of energy
18 billion times a week, well,
it does add up, and this is part
of where the concern comes from.
But, even when all global AI use is
added together, it still doesn’t even
add up to a fraction of a per cent.
And to think, this is a technology
that is being used by 1 in every 10
adults, voluntarily, I should add.
Sure, ChatGPT or other AI
models aren’t perfect, and you
might not use them yourself.
But they can be incredibly helpful, saving
you time, making you more productive,
and assisting you in a myriad of ways.
When you think about it, technology is
incredibly efficient in its energy use.
Every data centre in the world, so
that’s the computers powering the
entire internet, not just AI, uses
1.5% of the world’s electricity
and 0.23% of the world’s energy.
And to think, the average person
spends six and a half hours per day
online, interacting with data centres.
In many ways, it's a miracle
that something that’s now so
fundamental to our lives has
such a tiny environmental impact.
And of course, if we are to compare
any of these technological uses
to “offline” energy uses, the
difference is even more pronounced.
Producing one burger requires around
2,000 litres of water, enough to run
almost 10 million Google Gemini queries,
nearly 300 a day, for 100 years.
Now, this is not for me to say you should
stop eating burgers or never take an
aeroplane again; that’s not my point.
Rather, it’s that to think that you should
restrict your personal use of ChatGPT, but
still go to McDonald’s is like deciding
you’re going to cycle to take a private
plane; it is wildly misunderstanding
the impact of the two activities.
But there is one point that’s
worth pointing out, and that is
relating to the type of energy
that’s used in these data centres.
When you use ChatGPT or any other
model, your query is typically routed
to the nearest data centre to you.
The environmental impact of each request
is largely dependent on the type of
energy used to power that data centre.
And given the heavy electricity
requirements, these data centres
are often powered by dirtier
energy sources such as coal or oil.
This is part of the reason technology
companies are busy pledging to switch to
cleaner energy sources —not necessarily
because they have some inherent love
for the environment, but because
the cleaner the energy used in their
data centres, the less ammunition
environmental critics have against them.
And there’s more.
Water use might be a non-issue in the
wet and rainy country of Scotland, but
in countries less blessed by constant
showers and flowing rivers, it is.
Whether that’s in the Middle East or in
Arizona, every litre of water that goes
to a data centre is a litre of water
that isn’t available for something else.
And the sheer scale of the growth
in AI, and the data centres
required for this, is mindboggling.
By some estimates, the energy demand from
data centres is set to double by 2030,
with half of this growth driven by AI.
And “personal” AI use
is just a slice of this.
By personal AI use, I mean an individual,
you or me, or any of the other hundreds
of millions of people using ChatGPT
or other AI tools, and going into
the interface and asking a question.
There is also all of the behind-the-scenes
use of AI by companies, whether
that’s companies using AI models for
their internal business processes
or it’s the AI companies themselves.
So even if you never choose to use
AI tools personally, every time you
interact with a technology company,
you will most probably be using some
form of AI, whether you like it or not.
So, to wrap things up, global AI
use is probably at the lowest it
will ever be in your or my lifetime.
New models are coming out almost every
week, adoption is increasing fast, and AI
is being deployed into everything we do.
Yes, it might use significantly more
energy than things like traditional Google
searches, but it is far from the worst
thing you can do with a computer, and its
environmental impact pales in comparison
with most things you do in the real world.
And the good news is that AI is getting
much more energy-efficient, with that
Google study reporting that energy use
for each query is now 3% of what it
was a year ago, a 33-fold reduction.
Yes, AI does have an impact on the
environment, but on an individual
level, it offers a miraculous reward
for a minuscule environmental cost.
When it comes to reducing your personal
carbon footprint, there are dozens
of lifestyle changes, such as flying
less and taking public transport,
that would have a vastly greater
impact than your personal use of AI.
So, it's up to you, but if you ask me
whether I’d prefer to skip one burger, or
not use AI again for the rest of my life,
I think you can guess what I would say.
OK, then, that is it for today's episode
on the environmental impact on AI.
I hope it's been an interesting one
and that you've learnt something new.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought of this episode.
What had you heard about the
environmental impact of AI?
Had you changed your behaviour,
or will you change your behaviour
after listening to this?
I would love to know.
Let me know in the comments below if
you're listening to this somewhere
where you can comment, and for the
members among you, you can head right
into our community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.